---
layout: post
title: Hacking Bad & Hard Habits - Ch 10 Atomic Habits
tags: [Atomic Habits]
---

**Personal Context**

Having read [sapiens](https://www.ynharari.com/book/sapiens/) just like everyone else last year, I was aware of some of the more base instincts and behaviours we display in modern life, and how they can be traced back thousands of years. The way we discuss them in heavier literature however, often comes back down to mating behaviour, the search for nutrition, and avoidance of predators--not why teenaged girls spend all afternoon on *facebook*. What I took away from this chapter was how deeply ingrained our motives are for engaging in our habits in a certain way, as well as how modern contexts fit into this picture. The story hasn't changed! After all these years, we are simply finding different means to the same ends. Knowing all this, I've taken a new look at some of my own bad habits, and wondered why I engage in those--what baser desire am I trying to fulfil by browsing reddit, or distracting myself from more pressing issues?

I think that everyone could do well to look at their daily course of action, even in miniscule things, and try to trace these back to the fundamental desire that they are trying to fulfill. Perhaps with a little bit of additional awareness, we could more easily step outside ourselves and see our habits as independent entities from ourselves. Treating them as manifestations of baser human desire might make it easier to separate these behaviours from our personalities, and work on them as such.

### How to Find and Fix the Causes of Bad Habits

In order to delve further into this topic, we first need to revisit cravings--what exactly is a craving, actually?

*"A craving is a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying motive."*

An example, as given by Clear: "I want to eat tacos." is the manifestation of the deeper motive "I need food to survive.".

Other examples of underlying motives include:
- Conserve energy
- Obtain food and water
- Find love and reproduce
- Connect and bond with others
- Win social acceptance and approval
- Reduce uncertainty
- Achieve status and prestige

Almost any product or service centered around the forming of habits (explicitly or implicitly) does not necessarily generate new motivation, but attaches itself to existing *underlying motives*. Your craving for cigarettes might be a manifestation of your desire for relief and calm. Playing video games? Achieving status and prestige. As Clear so eloquently puts it:

*"Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires"*

Even though our surroundings, professions, cultures, and gadgets change, the underlying motives behind the behaviour we exhibit remain the same. The crux lies in the fact that there are **many different ways to appease the same underlying motive**.

While one person might relieve stress by smoking a cigarette, another might do exactly the opposite and go for a run! As we know, habits go deep--the ones you use to address your cravings are just the ones you have come to know over time.

Your past experiences with the world around you determine how you react to a cue. Every action is subconsciously preceded by a prediction of what will happen next, based solely on your past experience and supplemental information. Two people can look at the same cigarette--one might predict they will be repulsed by the smell, while the other might predict a wave of chemical release and relaxation.

We associate certain feelings with these predictions, which we describe as a craving. A craving is described here as the feeling that something is missing, triggered by a cue. The cue alerts you to the fact that there is a discrepancy between your current state, and desired state, upon which you take action to rectify the situation. When you tear open that bag of Doritos, it's not the cheesy goodness you seek, but rather a *different feeling*.

To recap: the habits you perform to address the cravings you feel, are attempts to address underlying motives. If that action or habit is successful in addressing that motive, you'll do it again..and again..and again.

### Reprogramming Your Brain to Enjoy Hard habits

Another tool to make habits more attractive, is simply mentally re-framing them. A slight change in mindset through change in perspective can do wonders to inspire you to chase after a habit more enthusiastically.

Think of it this way, rather than *having* to do something, you *get* to! Rather than *having* to go to the gym, you *get* to go out and build beastly strength. Reinterpreting the feeling of dread you get waking up early for work, as a positive feeling of going out and putting your talents to use is not easy and requires time, but can change the way you think about those habits in the long run.

A final tool you can use to make habits more attractive, is the *motivation ritual*. Every time you plan to engage in a desired habit, attach an activity you enjoy--and ritualise it. You can use this technique to create a cue from scratch--one user reported listening to music he enjoyed before getting focused on his writing. Eventually, the simple act of putting on his headphones, inspired his focus towards his work automatically. Adapt this to any situation, just remember to find something that makes you truly happy, and engage in that action *just before* your desired habit.

The end goal of course, is that the resultant habit also makes you feel happy, just like the chosen cue!
