---
layout: post
title: The Law of Least Effort - Atomic Habits Ch.12
tags: [Atomic Habits]
---

*"Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible."*

### Energy Expenditure


Every action requires a certain amount of energy--the more energy is required, the less likely the action is to occur. Consider for a moment, the low effort (often also instantly gratifying) habits that take up much of our daily lives--these cost little energy and thus require minimal motivation to actuate. Taking a differing perspective; a habit is a means to achieve an end-goal. Essentially then, a habit is an obstacle to reaching that goal, and minimising the size of that obstacle, would minimise your effort required towards reaching the end-result. 

We are capable of significant hard work but we can also be fickle creatures, riding the wave of life carrying emotional weight on our shoulders. On days where you might not be in the right frame of mind to climb Kilimanjaro, we need to find the path of least resistance to still be able to work towards our goals.

### Reducing Friction

There are several techniques to "reduce friction", or diminish the energy required to engage in your chosen habits. One of the big ones that was discussed in an earlier chapter has to do with shaping your direct environment to be efficient or habit stimulating. What you're doing with this technique, but also with others, is essentially to identify and minimise these frictions. Some examples include:

- Finding an environment removed from distraction. Writing in a notebook with a pen, instead of on a computer. Working in a library where you won't be tempted to kick back and chat with your friends.

- Going to the gym on the way home, rather than going home first.

- Setting up a dedicated space in your house for a certain pursuit, such that that area is only used for that habit or activity.

- Filling the fridge with groceries at the start of the week, so that you'll be less tempted to order pizza.


Minimising frictions is all about priming your environment to make your life easier. It's not about working hard per se, but as one user puts it, being *proactively lazy*. The simplest ways towards a good habit, are found by actively creating the path of least resistance for yourself. Packing your gym stuff and putting the bag next to the door renders the subsequent action to actually go, nearly effortless.


If this still doesn't help, its possible to crank things up and take it to the next level, by actively priming your environment *against* bad habits. Putting the TV remote on the high shelf, keeping your phone in the drawer, or tearing up the pizza coupons can actively de-stimulate you from engaging in these unwanted behaviours. While they might not help to truly combat addiction, they could fulfil the last step in helping you engage in your chosen habits.  

*"Redesign your life so the actions that matter most are also the actions that are easiest to do"*
