---
layout: post
title: Manipulating Cues and Environments - Atomic Habits 5-6
tags: [Atomic Habits]
---



**Personal Context**

These chapters were all about habit building strategies centered around the first tenet of Clear's doctrine, manipulating *cues*. I was particularly intrigued by the habit-stacking strategy, in which one can essentially create a complete chain of behaviours. In previous meetings we had discussed what I see defined here as implementation intentions, something I think I would do well to try to apply--some of the positive habits that I have started to build rely on pure excitement and willpowere to maintain, and could use a bit more structure. I think about running for example, something that I like to do at the end of a long day, but happens spontaneously before or after dinner, and not exactly at a set time or on a specific day.

The section on environment was interesting to read within the context of habits, as I had seen it before somewhat in behavioural economics texts describing "nudge" theory. One of the described notions that I had discovered on my own in past years was to separate your workspace from your personal space, something that is occasionally hard to do as a student living in one room. I do however notice how significantly different my mind operates in one environment or another. The cues surrounding me right now for example, are centered largely around leisure and relaxation--there is a guitar, there is a computer, a comfy sofa, and a little electronics project on the table--everything points towards downtime. While most of these objects serve one purpose, the computer for example is somewhat neutral. Once it has been designated for a certain role/habit however, it is hard to recontextualise. I know of myself that I am very sensitive to these environmental *cues*, and that it is important for me to try and surround myself with environments that stimulate building of productive habits.



#### Two Habit Building Strategies

*Implementation Intentions* - A statement expressing how and when you intend to implement a specific habit (proven to increase your likelihood to perform said action)
People who make a plan, will follow through.

**I will [behaviour] at [time] in [location].**

*Habit Stacking* - No behaviour happens in isolation (Diderot effect - lifestyle upgrades). One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit, and stack your behaviour on top.

**After [current habit], I will  [new habit]**

Combining habits, pairing them, bonding them, will make you more likely to assimilate the new one. The key is to use a habit that you already have deeply ingrained as the first link in the chain--eventually, as a master you will be able to create multi-habit combo stacks. Within the previous framework, the existing habit acts as the *cue* for the new habit.
For optimal effectiveness:
- The cue should have the same frequency as the desired habit
- The cue should be highly specific, and immediately actionable
- You can use *implementation intentions* to make cues clearer


#### Environment vs Motivation

This chapter is really interesting--a lot of "nudge" theory as to how your direct environment supports the development of new/breaking of old habits. (Recall the example about placement of healthy foods in school cafeterias from Thaler.)

Human beings perceive mostly the world empirically, through the use of our five senses--however, of the 11 million sensory receptors we possess, 10 million are dedicated to sight. "A small change in what you **see** can lead to a big change in what you **do**."

Recall: Every habit is initiated by a cue.

Since we are more likely to notice cues that stand out, we can initiate these habits more successfully by placing cues more accessibly. Sprinkling triggers throughout your surroundings helps you notice and think about your habit more often, and thus increases your chance of actuating the habit successfully.

Another interesting point--besides your own home (and even then) most of the world around us is structured by others, and often done to make you engage with your environment in a certain way. Changing your environment, this form of intrusion, is powerful because it isn't something that people tend to do very often.

#### On Context ####

We talked about triggers and surroundings previously, but it is important to realise that cues are contextual. Triggers are seldom individual cues, but rather the product of a surrounding with various sensory inputs--a context.

Consider not what an object is, but what your relationship the object is. What does the object represent to you? The couch is where you like to read, the mirror is where you brush your teeth, but to someone else, these objects might represent something completely different.

**Strategically important**: Building a new habit can be much easier in a new environment, one in which the context is as yet undefined to you. A blank canvas is easier to start painting on.

Whenever possible avoid mixing the context of one habit with another! When you are mixing contexts, you are bound to try to mix habits, and the easier habit will win out. I know this from personal experience, unfortunately..

*Relaxation is easier when you are in a space designed for that purpose. The same goes for working, sleeping, or any other manner of activity.*
