---
layout: post
title: Leadership Profile: Toto Wolff
tags: [Leaders]
---




### Leadership and Management style

- Culture of brutal honesty within the team, in order to build complete trust necessary for creative and productive collaboration
- "No Blame" culture (Don't blame the person, blame the problem). Leadership is the first to admit mistakes, Toto often begins a meeting by recounting and reflecting on a mistake. Opens things up for juniors to do the same, lead by example
- Prussian war tactics 'Auftragstaktik' by Helmuth von Moltke


### Leadership Profiles: Toto Wolff of Mercedes F1

There is no doubt that Toto Wolff has already solidified his legacy in the annals of motor racing history--with five consecutive double-championships (driver's and constructor's) as the team principal of the Mercedes F1 Team, he has been at the helm of one of the most dominant racing franchises in modern history. With only minor previous experience in motorsport however, he isn't exactly the figure one might have expected to catalyse Ferrari's woes. A successful industrial investor in his past and concurrent lives, he pivoted many of the leadership qualities built up over a successful business career into the management of the Mercedes F1 team. We here take a moment to look into the man behind the wolf(f), how he developed himself, and what lessons we might take for ourselves in both our personal and professional lives.

### Background

For a full treatment on Wolff's biography, I suggest one of the many sources online--important to note here however, is that he is somewhat of an outsider with regard to his initial involvement in the F1 community. While certainly a familiar face after the teams many successes, Wolff was initially involved only as an investor when he purchased a share of the Williams F1 team in the late 00s.**additional work needed here**

In  the long-form interviews he has given, Wolff exudes a sharp intellect padded with a becoming sense of humility. Though diplomatic and well spoken, he has a way of expressing his thoughts and ideas that feels rather casual, in the same way that you might speak to an old friend over coffee. A learned balance of personable and to-the-point, it quickly becomes clear that he devotes a lot of attention to the way in which he communicates with the people around him.

Born and raised in Austria, Wolff dabbled in motorsport as a late teenager, as well as sporadically over the course of his investment career. Focusing



### Leadership Style

Wolff has instigated a culture of self described "brutal honesty" within his team. The goal of a workplace where participants are less afraid to show vulnerability, is to create an environment where people are unafraid to make mistakes, and aren't trying to mask their failures for the sake of optics. Admitting and owning one's own mistakes as a leader, he says, is inspirational to junior team members--if the boss can stand in front of everyone and genuinely admit that they erred, why shouldn't I be able to?

The honesty and close nature of the team serves another purpose--a keen student of neuropsychology, Wolff subscribes to the theory that trusting relationships lay the basis for creative and productive collaboration. As espoused by communications experts such as [Judith Glaser](https://organizationalperformancegroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/ODP-Conversational-Intelligence.pdf), distrusting and combative conversational situations trigger different parts of the brain. Distrust or the perceived presence of threat triggers a biological defense response (in the amigdala) in which a person is far less likely to be receptive to the opinions and ideas of others, to the detriment of the whole team. By breaking down these barriers, building deep trust between team members, and working hard to keep the space open for reflection, Wolff hopes to stimulate those in his surroundings to engage in each-other's ideas and grow together.

All of these concepts fall neatly in line as the key requirements for his overarching management strategy, loosely based on [*"Auftragstaktik"*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission-type_tactics), a Prussian military leadership doctrine. Relying principally on mutual trust and understanding, this leadership style aims to unite an organisation under a strong, clear, and concise mission. Knowing the overarching intent of their leader and organisation on a deep level allows team members to act independently within the confines of their professional environment, and respond quickly and accordingly to dynamic situations.
