---
layout: post
title: Personal Habit Review - One Month On
tags: [Personal Reflection]
---


### Personal Habit Review

Over the course of the past month, I've started to try and build certain habits using the teachings of coaching sessions and habit books. I have tried to apply certain tools from these resources to try and make the formation of these habits easier, more concrete, and increase my stick-to-it-iveness towards them as much as possible. It hasn't been easy, and there have been many bumps along the way towards trying to make it happen, but I've certainly learned a lot about myself along the way, and have started to change some aspects of how I go about my daily routine.

### Habit 1: Three Daily Wins, and Morning Coffee

The first habit that I have wanted to form, is a goal setting ritual for the day that outlines the three major tasks that I hope to accomplish. The three wins set a guideline for what I hope to achieve, in a piecewise and not too overbearing fashion. In order to try and make the habit stick better, I've applied two habit forming tools.

1. Habit Chaining/Cue Forming - In my morning routine, I always drink a coffee with or just after I have breakfast. I've tried to instill the coffee as a *cue* to sit down and think about what I want my three wins for the day to be, and write them down for myself. The logic behind this is twofold; firstly, chaining the habit with an existing cue might make the barrier to entry to this new habit lower--by attaching it to a routine that's already in place. The second aspect lies in the fact that my morning coffee is something that I really *want* and look forward do, while the three wins is something that I feel that I *need* to do. Binding the two together, should in theory make it easier to overcome the initial hurdle.

2. Time Limit - I want to have my goals for the day set out before 10am, which adds an additional layer of external motivation to get them out there for the day.

**Progress**: Progress on the formation of this habit has been two-sided. There have been definite lapses here, while not necessarily at fault of the morning routine, come more as a result of other hindrances that come in the way of the evening review (simply not having completed the wins, that is). Looking back, I manage to get something out most mornings which I can then use as a guideline--an important aspect to note however, is that I do always think of it now in the morning as I'm drinking my coffee just after breakfast. The neurons have been hard at work in laying pathways to accommodate this new connection, which means that there are forces at work.


### Habit 2: Finding Work Focus

The second habit I've tried to form rests around finding the frame of mind to focus on being productive, getting work done, and chipping away at the wins that I set out for myself during the day. Again, I've tried to use certain tools to make this mental shift more palatable.

1. Cue Forming - I've taken to a technique in which I physically stand up and mime stepping into a circle, a figurative hula-hoop lying on the ground, if you will. Stepping into this circle represents stepping into my 'focused' frame of mind.

2. Environmental Shaping - I've noticed that I am (like many others) extremely sensitive to the environment I place myself in. As is drilled repeatedly in Clear's Atomic Habits as well as many other habit forming doctrines, the environment you place yourself in has significant effects towards the addition or removal of frictions. I find that when I'm in an environment that is overly stimulating, either through overt distractions or lack of productive atmosphere that the vastly large majority of my energy is expended simply to try and retain focus on the task at hand. Whenever possible, I liked to go to buildings at university where people were hard at work, which seems to be the best cue for me to do the same. I covet this social pressure like a safety blanket, which has helped me to get the majority of my work done these past years, barring those projects that were driven either by initial excitement or precipitous stress.

**Progress**: Progress here has been difficult. Since my enrollment at the university has been officially terminated (early may), I have been denied access to certain university facilities, rendering me unable to access my preferred "working" environment. The cue system was working amicably for the period of time when I was able to combine the two tools--but now that I don't really have a separate environment in which to work, it's proven not to be enough on its own to stimulate my desired mental shift. I've talked with different people about this issue and have started to form a plan of action in trying to approach the topic. For the time being, I'm trying to find public spaces that lend themselves at least partially to this.

At the same time, I've laid some connections with a behavioural therapist to look at taking on my focus problem--it's something that I only recently realised is something that's been plaguing me for the majority of my life, and might need some additional work on a deeper level. For the most part, the things that I want to focus on are things that *I objectively want to do*, yet I still find myself being distracted with alarming ease, unless there is an external influence present.

At the moment, this is proving to be a problem in many different aspects of my life, because it actively inhibits habit formation in other areas, such as the above--when I can't get my wins completed for a certain day, I find myself more sheepish to approach the next, thinking about all of the roll-over tasks from the day before.


### Mini-Habit: Nailbiting

After reading about someone who stopped their nailbiting habit in a certain way, I decided to try it for myself. His way of making sure that he wouldn't relapse into biting his nails again, was to get a manicure, and really make them look great! The notion behind this is that you're more likely to take care of something if you put effort into it and really make it worthwhile.

I've decided to do the same, and have been able to hold off for more than a week already. The feeling of having nails beyond a certain length is completely weird and alien, something I haven't really felt since high-school when I managed the same for a period of a few weeks when I met my first girlfriend, but I'm really deadset on getting this manicure!
